Document decision for Control API interaction with Zones (#152)
appuio/appuio-io-docs: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/explanation/decisions/control-api-interaction-with-zones.adoc

= Control API interaction with Zones

== Problem

For some use-cases in the xref:references/architecture/control-api.adoc[Control API] there has to be an interaction with xref:references/glossary.adoc#_zone[zones].
The Control API might need information from zones for read-only purposes, but it could also interact with zones and cause configuration changes on them.

We need to specify how this interaction is conducted, as there are different ways how to do that.
It also takes the xref:references/functional-requirements/portal.adoc[Portal] into consideration, as it plays an important role when interacting with the Control API and its features.

== Proposals

Proposal 1: The Control API connects to zones (Virtual)::
The Control API provides resources from zones via an aggregated API server.
It directly connects to all the associated zones API servers and exposes it to the Control API as virtual resources.

Proposal 2: The Control API connects to zones (CRDs)::

> A controller connects to the associated zones API servers and reads or writes remote resources as needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A controller connects to the associated zones' API servers and reads or writes remote resources as needed.
```

The needed resources are represented as custom resources in the Control API.

Proposal 3: Zones connect to the Control API::

> One ore many agents on the zones connect to the Control API and write and read custom resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One or many agents on the zones connect to the Control API and write and read custom resources.
```

These are regular Kubernetes controllers, connecting to a remote Kubernetes API server - with all the possibilities like watching resources.
The needed resources are represented as custom resources in the Control API.

== Decision

*Zones connect to the Control API*

== Rationale

Connecting from zones to the Control API has several advantages over the other proposals:

* Only outgoing connections from zones needed, which is usually easier when firewalls are involved

> * Permission model (RBAC) can be easier modelled in the Control API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Permission model (RBAC) is easier to model in the Control API
```
